CSCS Exam Content
The CSCS exam is divided into two sections. Section 1, Scientific
Foundations, is a 1.5-hour examination consisting of 80 scored
and 15 non-scored multiple-choice questions. Section 2, Practical/
Applied, is a 2.5-hour examination consisting of 110 scored
and 15 non-scored multiple-choice questions. 30-40 of those
questions are video- and/or image-based. First-time candidates
are required to complete both sections. Those who fail one of the
two sections will only be required to retake the section that was
failed. The failed section must be retaken within one year of the
initial exam date. The full DCO is presented in Appendix F.
Domain
Percent of
Exam Section
Number of
Questions
SECTION 1: Scientific Foundations
Exam Time:
1.5 hours
Exercise Science 55% 44
Sports Psychology 24% 19
Nutrition 21% 17
Non-Scored Questions - 15
Total 100% 95
SECTION 2: Applied/Practical
Exam Time:
2.5 hours
Exercise Technique 36% 40
Program Design 35% 38
Organization and
Administration
11% 12
Testing and Evaluation 18% 20
Non-Scored Questions - 15
Total 100% 125


APPENDIX E: EXAM DETAILED CONTENT OUTLINES
INTRODUCTION
The NSCA (as previously mentioned), develops a Detailed Content
Outlines (DCO) for each certification. These documents categorize
the knowledge, skills, and abilities required for professional practice
into domains, subdomains, and tasks. Additionally, the DCO
provides candidates with the number and type of questions found
on the exam within each domain.
Below is an excerpt from the domain Testing and Evaluation
from the Practical/Applied section of the CSCS exam. There are a
total of three subdomains (A, B, and C) and eight tasks (two listed
under sub-domain A, three under B, and three under C). A total
of 20 questions will be found within the exam for this domain of
which three will be recall, 11 application, and six analysis. These
questions are not evenly distributed across the tasks. Therefore,
certificants should always prepare for any content to be assessed
using any question format (formats are explained in the
next section). Concepts not listed in the DCO will not be included
on the exam. Preparation for each certification exam should be
focused on the concepts that are listed in the appropriate DCO.
SAMPLE
EXCERPT FROM THE CSCS PRACTICAL/APPLIED DCO
CSCS® EXAMINATION
Detailed Content Outline
SCIENTIFIC FOUNDATIONS
Cognitive Level
Total Items
Recall
Application
Analysis
4. TESTING AND EVALUATION 3 11 6 20
A. Select and Administer Tests to Maximize Test Reliability and Validity
1. Tests based upon the unique aspects of a sport, sport position, and training status
2. Test administration procedures that use equipment, personnel, and time efficiently
B. Administer Testing Protocols and Procedures to Ensure Reliable Data Collection
1. Testing equipment and its proper use
2. Testing procedures (e.g., warm-up, how to test, proper rest between trials)
3. Testing to assess physical characteristics (e.g., bodyweight, girth, body fat, height) and
evaluate performance (e.g., muscular strength, power, anaerobic capacity, muscular
endurance, aerobic endurance, agility, speed, flexibility)
C. Evaluate and Interpret Test Results
1. Validity of test results
2. Typical vs. atypical test results based on a sport or sport position
3. Design or modification of the training program based on test results (i.e., determine
which outcome of training needs to be improved in a future program)
NSCA CERTIFICATION HANDBOOK ›› NSCA.com ›› Page 34
EXAM QUESTIONS
Format
Exam questions (also called "exam items”) all share the same selected-
response format — multiple-choice questions. Candidates
select the best answer from three presented options (e.g., a, b, or
c). Some questions will reference an image or video, and others
may be a description of a situation, or “case.” The exams do not
include essay-type or other constructed-response questions that
require test-takers to write their own answers.
Complexity
Even though all exam items share the same format, they differ in
terms of complexity. Different levels of cognition (e.g., recall, application,
or analysis) are required to determine the best answer.
The knowledge, skills, and abilities of a candidate include both
simple and very complex tasks. The candidate may need to recall
facts or apply information, while at other times they may need to
conduct an evaluation of a situation to determine the best course
of action. Therefore, the questions on the exams are written at
different levels of complexity. Definitions of the cognitive levels
and examples are provided below:
Recall
Recall questions require a candidate to recognize information
such as concepts, principles, facts, or procedures. These
questions ask for information that is easily found in a manual,
textbook, or other resources. Recall questions can generally be
reduced to “what is x?”
Example: Which of the following is a characteristic of fasttwitch
muscle fibers?
A. high power output
B. high resistance to fatigue
C. low contraction speed
Application
Application items require candidates to apply knowledge that
is dependent upon a situation. Examples of application exam
questions include basic calculations and identifying relationships
between concepts. Questions may be posed as "if, then" situations;
e.g., “if this variable is present, then this outcome will occur.”
Example: A strength and conditioning professional is working
with a 20-year-old collegiate athlete who has a resting heart
rate of 60 bpm. Using the Karvonen formula, what is this
athlete’s exercise heart rate at an exercise intensity of 85%?
A. 196 bpm
B. 187 bpm
C. 179 bpm
Analysis
Analysis items require candidates to consider and evaluate several
pieces of information, or variables, to arrive at the most appropriate
answer. Examples of analysis questions include complex
calculations and the identification of patterns in data.
Example: A 21-year-old, 5 ft, 10 in. (170 cm) collegiate
Division I soccer forward weighing 165 lb (74.8 kg) has the
following assessment results:
Body fat: 12%
Back squat: 285 lb (129.2 kg)
Vertical jump: 23 in. (58.42 cm)
5-10-5: 4.5 sec
40 m sprint: 7.5 sec
Which of the following is the MOST important to improve?
A. strength
B. speed
C. agility